---
layout: post
title: "Spark SQL 抽样函数 ——TABLESAMPLE 的坑点"
date: "2024-04-22T01:01:35.913Z"
---
Spark SQL 抽样函数 ——TABLESAMPLE 的坑点
================================

最近需要实现一段 Spark SQL 逻辑，对数据集进行抽样指定的行数。

由于数据集较大，刚开始的逻辑是，取窗口函数随机排序后 row\_number 的前 n 行。但运行速度较慢，所以想起了 TABLESAMLE 函数，支持直接取 Rows， 尝试后发现速度特别快，基本上几秒内就完成对亿级数据的采样。所以好奇就去查看文档和代码逻辑。

> The `TABLESAMPLE` statement is used to sample the table. It supports the following sampling methods:
> 
> *   `TABLESAMPLE`(x `ROWS`): Sample the table down to the given number of rows.
> *   `TABLESAMPLE`(x `PERCENT`): Sample the table down to the given percentage. Note that percentages are defined as a number between 0 and 100.
> *   `TABLESAMPLE`(`BUCKET` x `OUT OF` y): Sample the table down to a `x` out of `y` fraction.
> 
> **Note:** `TABLESAMPLE` returns the approximate number of rows or fraction requested.

文档中没有对实现逻辑有过多的说明，所以去代码中找问题。

源码中，匹配 `SampleByRowsContext` 时，调用的方法是 `Limit(expression(ctx.expression), query)`，也就是说和 `limit rows` 是一个逻辑。

而 `SampleByPercentileContext` 实现的才是随机采样。

所以，如果对抽样的随机性有要求，还是老老实实用 `SampleByPercentileContext`，或者窗口函数。

附 相关代码：

      /**
       * Add a [[Sample]] to a logical plan.
       *
       * This currently supports the following sampling methods:
       * - TABLESAMPLE(x ROWS): Sample the table down to the given number of rows.
       * - TABLESAMPLE(x PERCENT) [REPEATABLE (y)]: Sample the table down to the given percentage with
       * seed 'y'. Note that percentages are defined as a number between 0 and 100.
       * - TABLESAMPLE(BUCKET x OUT OF y) [REPEATABLE (z)]: Sample the table down to a 'x' divided by
       * 'y' fraction with seed 'z'.
       */
      private def withSample(ctx: SampleContext, query: LogicalPlan): LogicalPlan = withOrigin(ctx) {
        // Create a sampled plan if we need one.
        def sample(fraction: Double, seed: Long): Sample = {
          // The range of fraction accepted by Sample is [0, 1]. Because Hive's block sampling
          // function takes X PERCENT as the input and the range of X is [0, 100], we need to
          // adjust the fraction.
          val eps = RandomSampler.roundingEpsilon
          validate(fraction >= 0.0 - eps && fraction <= 1.0 + eps,
            s"Sampling fraction ($fraction) must be on interval [0, 1]",
            ctx)
          Sample(0.0, fraction, withReplacement = false, seed, query)
        }
    
        if (ctx.sampleMethod() == null) {
          throw QueryParsingErrors.emptyInputForTableSampleError(ctx)
        }
    
        val seed = if (ctx.seed != null) {
          ctx.seed.getText.toLong
        } else {
          (math.random() * 1000).toLong
        }
    
        ctx.sampleMethod() match {
          case ctx: SampleByRowsContext =>
            Limit(expression(ctx.expression), query)
    
          case ctx: SampleByPercentileContext =>
            val fraction = ctx.percentage.getText.toDouble
            val sign = if (ctx.negativeSign == null) 1 else -1
            sample(sign * fraction / 100.0d, seed)
    
          case ctx: SampleByBytesContext =>
            val bytesStr = ctx.bytes.getText
            if (bytesStr.matches("[0-9]+[bBkKmMgG]")) {
              throw QueryParsingErrors.tableSampleByBytesUnsupportedError("byteLengthLiteral", ctx)
            } else {
              throw QueryParsingErrors.invalidByteLengthLiteralError(bytesStr, ctx)
            }
    
          case ctx: SampleByBucketContext if ctx.ON() != null =>
            if (ctx.identifier != null) {
              throw QueryParsingErrors.tableSampleByBytesUnsupportedError(
                "BUCKET x OUT OF y ON colname", ctx)
            } else {
              throw QueryParsingErrors.tableSampleByBytesUnsupportedError(
                "BUCKET x OUT OF y ON function", ctx)
            }
    
          case ctx: SampleByBucketContext =>
            sample(ctx.numerator.getText.toDouble / ctx.denominator.getText.toDouble, seed)
        }
      }